Updated `Abstract Syntax Tree.md` (#897)
partiql/partiql-lang-kotlin: docs/design/Abstract Syntax Tree.md

# Introduction to PartiQL AST

## Design concerns

### Abstract Semantic Tree
It seems the term "AST" is often extended to mean more things than just "Abstract Syntax Tree" and our use of the term is no different. A better term might have been "Abstract Semantic Tree" because our AST was defined with the goal of modeling the intent of the PartiQL source and *not* the exact syntax. Thus, the original SQL from which an AST was constituted cannot be derived, however the *semantics* of that SQL are guaranteed to be preserved. One example that demonstrates this is the fact that we model a `CROSS JOIN` in the same way that we model an `INNER JOIN` with a condition of `TRUE`. Semantically, these have the exact same functionality, so they have the same representation in the AST.

### Tree Structure
> It **is** Actually a Tree

Language implementations often use the term "Abstract Syntax Tree" to refer to a data structure that is actually a
graph. Our implementation for PartiQL's AST is a tree and *not* a graph. It contains no cycles and each node can only
reference its children.

## Implementation

> There were multiple alternative implementations of PartiQL AST, e.g. S-expression & `ExprNode`, which were already deprecated & removed. Now we are using PIG generated AST for better maintainability. See https://github.com/partiql/partiql-ir-generator to learn more about PIG. The domain file is here, [partiql.ion](https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang-kotlin/blob/main/lang/resources/org/partiql/type-domains/partiql.ion), where the tree structure just mirrors the PartiQL grammar. 

Reviewer: I get the point of `the tree structure just mirrors the PartiQL grammar`, I don't think this statement is 100% correct.  I am no writing expert, but here is my attempt, feel free to take it or leave it. I would suggest to point the link to the Wiki instead of the front page though. 
```suggestion
PartiQL uses [PIG](https://github.com/partiql/partiql-ir-generator/wiki) to concisely defines the structure of our ASTs. [partiql.ion](https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang-kotlin/blob/main/lang/resources/org/partiql/type-domains/partiql.ion) contains the type universe, which specified named constraints for every node and its attributes in the generated AST. 
```

There were multiple alternative implementations of PartiQL AST, e.g. S-expression & `ExprNode`, which were already deprecated & removed. Now we are using PIG generated AST for better maintainability. See https://github.com/partiql/partiql-ir-generator to learn more about PIG. The domain file is here, [partiql.ion](https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang-kotlin/blob/main/lang/resources/org/partiql/type-domains/partiql.ion), where the tree structure just mirrors the PartiQL grammar. 

No mechanism has been provided to mutate an instance of the AST after it has been instantiated.  Modifications to an
existing tree must use cloning re-writes--for instance, a visitor pattern that returns a modified version of the input
tree can be utilized.
The rest of this doc describes some points of the implementation of PIG-generated code. 

## Design Patterns Used with the AST
### Immutable 

The AST employs a number of patterns and utilizes certain features of Kotlin to aid with the development process.
Without any introduction, the reasoning behind these patterns may not be completely apparent at first glance. What
follows is an is an attempt to document those patterns and features.

> ### Inheritance Mirrors The PartiQL Grammar

Author: I feel we don't need to explicitly mention how different kotlin classes map to AST nodes. Users can refer to `partiql.ion` file to understand it quickly.

- `org.partiql.lang.ast.SelectListItem`, for expressions that may appear between `SELECT` ... `FROM`.
- `org.partiql.lang.ast.FromSource`, for expressions that are data sources in a `FROM` clause.
- `org.partiql.lang.ast.PathComponent`, for the components of a path expression.
- `org.partiql.lang.ast.SelectProjection`, for the type of projection used by a
`SELECT`,`SELECT VALUE` or `PIVOT` query. This isn't directly related to the grammar but is convenient to represent
in this manner.
- `org.partiql.lang.ast.DataManipulation`, for data manipulation expressions that may optionally be wrapped with
 `FROM ... WHERE ...`.
- `org.partiql.lang.DmlOperation`, for the data manipulation operation itself (e.g. `INSERT INTO ...`)

All base classes of the AST are [sealed](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/sealed-classes.html) classes.

To keep the inheritance hierarchy manageable, the inheritance depth does not exceed 1.
No mechanism has been provided to mutate an instance of the AST after it has been instantiated.  Modifications to an existing tree must use cloning re-writes--for instance, a visitor transform that returns a modified version of the input tree can be utilized.

> ### Data Classes

Author: Data classes are not used in PIG-generated code

   } //.toUnit() is not needed
```

> 2. Destructuring

Author: Actually, I am not able to use this destructure feature with the PIG AST. I think it's probably for data classes

The `_: MetaContainer` component here simply causes a compile-time assertion that the third property of
`VariableReference` is of type `MetaContainer`, resulting in a compile-time error whenever a new property is added.

### Arbitrary Meta Information Can Be Attached to Any Node

TODO:  leaving this part unspecified for the moment because there is still some uncertainty surrounding the how metas
work.
3. Arbitrary Meta Information Can Be Attached to Any Node

TODO:  leaving this part unspecified for the moment because there is still some uncertainty surrounding how metas work.

## Rules for working with the AST
4. Rules for working with the AST

- Always add new properties *before* the `metas: MetaContainer` of a new property.
- When using `when` with a sealed class and branching by derived types as a statement use `case()` and `toUnit()` to
  trick the Kotlin compiler into being helpful.
- When using `when` with the derived types of a sealed class, use destructuring in each branch where possible.

> 

Author: The removed part from this line below is for V0 & V1 AST.

Author: What do you want that doc for? Is it for migration from V0 to PIG AST?

Author: By the way, V1 AST is not used by anyone from what I know

Reviewer: More like examples of PIG generated AST.

Author: Here, https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang-kotlin/issues/898
